Visitors of the “Automobiles” store on Ba-
kuninskaya St. in Moscow examining a Pobeda automobile.
bill. 1949
Design of the country's first passenger
mass car was started in December
1941 under the direction of the chief designer of the Gorky Automobile Plant (GAZ) A. Lipgart.
The car was named in honor of the future victory over Nazi Germany, which the Soviet people had no doubts about.
. The prototype was ready in 1944, but serial production started only after the war.
. For the first time
in the history of the USSR a passenger car became available for free sale. "Pobeda
met the world standards of automobile construction of that time. In 12 years more than 235 thousand cars were produced, some of them were sold to Austria, Belgium, Great Britain and other countries. Even nowadays GAZ M-20 “Pobeda” is highly valued by
collectors for its reliability and unique design.

difficulties, the country rapidly increased production of modern
machine tools, turbines, electrical appliances. In 1946, the serial production of the GAZ-51 truck and the
GAZ M-20 “Pobeda” passenger car began.
As in the 1930s, the rural population became the main human resource of the industrial sector. Millions of peasants moved
to the cities and obtained working specialties. Supplies of
equipment from German factories located in the Soviet zone of occupation, carried out within the framework of reparations, played a significant role in ensuring the growth of
industrial production. Hundreds of thousands
of captive Germans, Hungarians, Romanians, Japanese and others, who during
the war brought unprecedented grief and devastation to our land, worked on construction sites
and on reconstruction of destroyed buildings.
New oil and gas fields were discovered in the Urals.
The Volga-Don Canal, conceived
by Peter the Great, was built in the shortest possible time.

In total, more than 6,000 large enterprises were rebuilt and re-constructed during the Fourth Five-Year Plan. At the same time, the Cold War that had begun (more about it will be discussed in § 4) required-
an increase in the production of advanced military equipment and weapons
Already by 1950 the volume of industrial output exceeded the pre-
level by 70%, and in the Baltic republics and Moldova by 2-3 times. In the conditions of the Cold War, when the United States and other Western countries became potential
military opponents,
the Soviet leadership sought to prevent the possibility of
invasion of the tragedy of 1941.
The army was rapidly modernized: new heavy and medium tanks (IS-4, T-54) were created; the famous automatic rifle of designer M. Ka-
lashnikov (AK) was
adopted into service; jet fighters MiG-15
and MiG-17 were mastered; modern warships were laid down.

However, the main task was to eliminate as soon as possible
the US nuclear monopoly, which had developed plans to launch first 20 and then 50 or more atomic strikes against
USSR. The Soviet atomic project was supervised by L. Beria.
. Research
in the field of nuclear and missile technologies was led by outstanding
scientists I. Kurchatov, Y. Khariton, S. Korolev, M. Keldysh
and others. Thanks to the labor of hundreds of thousands of engineers, workers, builders, it was possible to create a nuclear missile shield of
country in the shortest possible time. In 1948, the USSR successfully launched the first ballistic missile R-1, and in August 1949 the atomic bomb was successfully tested.